# System Register XML for A-profile Architecture (2025-03)

## Release Date 2025-05-30

## Introduction

This is the **2025-03** release of the System
Register XML for A-profile Architecture, describing:

- The AArch64 and AArch32 views of the System registers, including
  Debug, PMU, AMU, MPAM, Generic Timer, and GIC.
- The AArch64 and AArch32 system control operations.
- The memory-mapped Debug, CTI, PMU, AMU, MPAM, GIC, and Generic Timer
  registers.

The [Proprietary Notice](SysReg_xml_A_profile-2025-03/xhtml/notice.html)
gives details of the terms and conditions under which this package is
provided.

If you have comments on the content of this package, create a ticket at
<https://support.developer.arm.com>. As part of the ticket, include:

- The title, "System Register XML for A-profile Architecture".
- The version, "2025-03".
- The section name to which your comments refer.
- A concise explanation of your comments.

Please see the [Documentation](#documentation) for more information on
the general structure of these descriptions.


## Product Status

The information relating to the 2024 Extensions is at Alpha quality.
Alpha quality means that most major features of the specification are
described in this release, but some features and details might be
missing. The information relating to the rest of the A-profile
Architecture is at Beta quality. Beta quality means that all major
features of the specification are described, but some details might be
missing.​

### Change history

- The memory-mapped register ERRGSR is now an array of registers
  ERRGSR\<m\>.
- DBGDOSLSR.OSLM field is updated to indicate it is IMPLEMENTATION
  DEFINED.
- CNTVOFF_EL2 description is corrected to refer to the virtual counter.
- PMZR.F0 description is corrected to indicate the fine grained-trap
  HDFGWTR2_EL2.nPMICNTR_EL0 affects the access to the field.
- The description of the ID_AA64ISAR2_EL1.RPRES field is updated to
  clarify that it only affects single-precision reciprocal and
  reciprocal square root instructions.
- SCTLR_EL1.UCI is updated to include instructions added by FEAT_OCCMO.
- The access text of the DC Invalidate by address instructions that
  refers to access at EL0 has been corrected to require write access
  permission to the Virtual Address.
- GIC ICV register pages that include ICC encodings are corrected to be
  identical to the ICC encoding accessors in the ICC register pages.
- The field HCR_EL2.MIOCNCE is deprecated and made Reserved, RES0.
- External registers ERRCRICR2, ERRERICR2, and ERRFHICR2 are updated to
  indicate they are all 32-bit registers.
- The description of the ISS encoding in ESR_EL1, ESR_EL2 and ESR_EL3
  are corrected to include instructions introduced by FEAT_PAuth_LR.
- TCR_ELx value constraints on FEAT_D128 are removed.
- Generic timer accessor conditions that test SCR_EL3.ECVEn==\'1\' are
  updated to also test for EL3.
- The description of the ERRPIDR4.SIZE field is corrected to include
  FEAT_RASSAv2.
- The configuration of the external PMZR_EL0 register is corrected to
  indicate that it is present when FEAT_PMUv3_EXT32 is implemented.
- The condition on SCR_EL3.TID5 is updated to be FEAT_IDTE3 and
  FEAT_MTE2.
- Instruction cache maintenance behavior when CTR_EL0.DIC is 1 is
  clarified.
- The SMIDR_EL1 description in field NSMC, is corrected to read SMCUs
  instead of SCMUs.
- The EDSCR.RW description is corrected to remove the incorrect
  Exception Levels and state the correct ones when the current Security
  State is implemented and enabled.
- The access text of the GICx_ICACTIVER\<n\>{E} registers has been
  updated to include a statement about writes becoming visible within a
  finite time. The access text of the GICx_ISACTIVER\<n\>{E} registers
  has also been clarified to write, that after reading back the value
  written, a subsequent deactivate generated by the CPU interface is
  ordered after the write to the registers.
- The PnCH field descriptions in TCR_EL3, TCR2_EL1 and TCR2_EL2 are
  corrected to remove the incorrect descriptions for the Protected bit
  and Contiguous bit.
- The field description for RGSR_EL1.SEED is corrected to indicate that
  it is used for generating values returned by the function RandomTag().
- The HCR_EL2 description in the field HCD, is corrected to apply to EL2
  and EL1.
- In TCR_EL1.E0PD1, the TTBR0_EL1 is corrected to TTBR1_EL1 when
  FEAT_E0PD is implemented.
- The field descriptions in SMCR_EL{1,2}.FA64 are corrected to account
  for HCR_EL2.{E2H,TGE} and to align with the function
  IsFullA64Enabled().
- PMPCSCTL accessors are updated to remove the reference to the function
  AllowExternalPMUAccess().
- The description of the HCR_EL2.TPCP field is updated to clarify that
  trapping applies only to instructions that are capable of being
  trapped, rather than assuming all specified instructions are always
  trapped.
- Inconsistent use of terminology when referring to ESR_ELx.EC is
  updated to refer to EC syndrome value.
- The description of HCRX_EL2.MCE2 is updated to remove references to
  behavior when HCR_EL2.TGE is 1.

Many simple clarifications and corrections are also present, but are too
small to be listed here. Some minor formatting changes are suppressed
and not highlighted in the diff output.

### Known issues

All issues identified in the below list will be fixed in a future
release.

- Accessibility for RAS registers will be relaxed to remove traps when
  there is a minimal RASv2 implementation.
- The description of PMSIDR_EL1.FDS will be updated to say the feature
  FEAT_SPE_FDS is not mandatory if PMSIDR_EL1.LDS is 0.
- Corresponding SET and CLR registers will be mapped to each other.
- MPAMBW2_EL2.{TRAP_MPAMBWIDR_EL1, TRAP_MPAMBW0_EL1, TRAP_MPAMBW1_EL1,
  TRAP_MPAMBWSM_EL1} trap fields will be renamed {nTRAP_MPAMBWIDR_EL1,
  nTRAP_MPAMBW0_EL1, nTRAP_MPAMBW1_EL1, nTRAP_MPAMBWSM_EL1}.
  MPAMBW3_EL3.TRAPLOWER trap field will be renamed nTRAPLOWER.
- MPAMBWIDR_EL1.{US_INT,US_FRAC} will be deleted.
- Bits 43:40 of GPTBR_EL3 will be an extension to the BADDR field.
- The PMEVTYPER\<n\>\_EL0.MT field description will be clarified to
  describe whether cycles are counted when the event is true for any of,
  all of, or the sum across all affected PEs.
- ID_AA64PFR0_EL1.RAS will be updated to remove the requirement to
  implement RAS System Architecture.

### Potential upcoming changes

Arm is constantly exploring ways to make the architecture presentation
precise and clear. Towards this, the following changes are expected in
future releases:

- Accessibility of unimplemented registers in indexed register arrays
  will be improved.
- Accessibility for memory mapped accesses to registers will be
  improved.
- Accessibility when there is a width mismatch between the accessor and
  the register will be improved.
- Configurability details will be captured more formally to define
  features, acceptable feature choices, and mapping of features to ID
  registers.

The details of the architecture are presented in pseudocode in
Architecture Specification Language (ASL). Arm is defining a new version
of the Architecture Specification Language, ASL1, to improve and expand
the capabilities of the language. Please see
https://developer.arm.com/Architectures/Architecture%20Specification%20Language
for details on this language. Arm will be publishing an equivalent
release in ASL1 format later in 2025.

### Intention and quality statements for all ArmARM architecture releases

The intention and scope of the **Architecture releases** is to describe
changes from the existing architecture to the next release. The quality
of the architecture releases refers to the accuracy and completeness of
the changes described in the specifications.

The intention and scope of the **XML releases** is to describe the
content and behavior of the registers, system registers, instructions,
pseudocode and features of the architecture in full, for human readers
in a way that enables correct information for the current or any
previous release can be deduced. The quality of the XML releases refers
to the accuracy and completeness of the content to a human reader.

The intention and scope of the **JSON releases** is to describe aspects
of the XML releases in a structured, machine readable format. The
content of the architectural content will be approximately equivalent to
the corresponding XML release. However there are some aspects of the
architecture which cannot yet be represented in a machine readable
format.

The intention and scope of the **Schema** for the JSON releases is to
describe the syntax and format of the json files used in the json
releases. The schema is still under development and is subject to
change.

## Documentation

### General

A description within the XML contains the following sections:

#### Purpose

A short description of the purpose of the register in the Arm Architecture.

#### Configuration

How the register is architecturally mapped onto another System register or a memory-mapped register. If the configuration of the PE affects the implementation of the register, then information about this is also included here.

#### Attributes

The size of the register.

#### Field descriptions

The register diagram and a description of the behavior of each field within the register.

### Memory-mapped registers

A memory-mapped register description also contains the following
sections:

#### Accessing

The address or offset of the register in the memory map, and the accessibility.

### System registers

A System register description also contains an "Accessing..." section, that includes:

- The assembler syntax for the instructions used to access the register,
  and how the instruction is encoded.
- Pseudocode that describes the execution of all instructions used to
  access the register, including information about traps and enables
  that apply upon that access.
- For some System registers, additional text is provided which gives
  extra information regarding the access to the register.
- The accessibility pseudocode for a register assumes that that register
  is implemented and that all features which affect its accesses are
  implemented. In most cases, the behavior upon access to a register is
  determined in part or in whole by the Exception level at which it is
  accessed.
